For the first time cybernetics and computer technology have crossed each other during the Second World War. In the early years of cybernetics their researchers proposed solutions to control information processes in using circuit diagrams and applications of mathematical laws. In this way the researchers provided foundations for the development of analogue and digital technologies. Cybernetics began with a search for new ways to apply mathematics in the development of solutions for technical tasks, and evolved to a generalising science.
In the summer of 1947 Norbert Wiener tried to find a title for a book in preparation. He decided to use the term "kybernetes", the "steersman": In controlling the movements of the ship the steersman communicates simultaneously with the ship and with its environment. "Cybernetics Or Control And Communication In The Animal And The Machine" was the name of the book published in 1948: The title points the readers´ interest to features of machines as well as animals. Wiener's term "cybernetics" for a new research field became established.
For the cyberneticians' interest for computing as a "calculus of reasoning" Wiener regarded Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz as precursor. In 1703 he developed a mathematical universal language – the binary coding of numbers – and from 1672 to 1720 he planned calculating machines for realisations. Leibniz was interested in facilitations of thought processes by technical means and offered the procedure enabling inventors to achieve this objective: Formalisation enables the mechanisation of calculation. 1 With his reference to Leibniz Wiener offers an opportunity to present cybernetics in a Hanoverian series of events on the occasion of the 300th anniversary of the death of the philosopher and mathematician.
In the fifties and sixties the pioneers of computer art either participated in efforts to develop cybernetic methods (like Gordon Pask) or they were influenced by cybernetics (like Nicolas Schöffer, Georg Nees, Frieder Nake and Herbert Werner Franke).
The Evolution of the Cybernetic Foundations during the Second World War
In 1948 two texts provide the basics of cybernetics. Both inform about the research that made them possible: In "Cybernetics Or Control And Communication In The Animal And The Machine" Norbert Wiener mentions the war research in the United States of America, and in "A Mathematical Theory of Communication" Claude Elwood Shannon integrates reports on results of this research in "A Mathematical Theory of Communication". 2 With Wiener's and Shannon's contributions to the prediction of flight paths in fire control systems the American research for an anti-aircraft technology became the initiator of cybernetics.
During the Second World War computing capacities were necessary not only in fire control systems, but also in the cryptography, for whom computers were developed. Via computer-aided cryptography the code of the German Enigma code machine was deciphered.
The probability theory is useful for predictions if the possibilities of a system and the statistic frequency of previous occurrences of these possibilities are known. The probability theory became fundamental in the cryptography as well as in Wiener's and Shannon's research for predictions of the flight paths chosen by pilots to approach a destination. Anti-aircraft systems and cryptography became new fields for the application of mathematics. 
An anti-aircraft system receives input data on a moving target and delivers the navigation of a bullet to the target as output. In the time period from input to output the target continues its course. Via computing processes the system must determine possible movements of the target to aggrandize the chances to hit the target. The calculators in anti-aircraft systems of the Second World War were referred to as computers.
In the circuit of a fire control system the "negative feedback" was important for the control of informations. Great distortions caused by erroneous target tracking were eliminated via filters and a continuous flight path was reconstructed with data smoothing. Thus the data recognized by "negative feedback" were prohibited to initiate the generation of an ouput. 4
Since 1940 Norbert Wiener had the task 5 to improve the possibilities to predict the flight path of enemy flying objects. Efforts to refine the precision of the prediction tried to fulfill the goal to increase the hit rate of the anti-aircraft in the Battle of Britain. Wiener divided the motion of a flying object in time phases. This procedure allowed to recognise the repetitions and modifications between the phases. 
Data produced by soldiers tracking flight objects were used by Wiener as an input of his prediction system. These data were supplied by subjects in a test model – the "antiaircraft predictor" constructed by Julian Bigelow and Paul Mooney. 7 Wiener's application of the theory of probability and statistics was transferred by Shannon to an analysis of relations between time phases in using stochastics' "measurable transition probabilities."
Wiener's "theoretical model" 9 for the command devices of anti-aircraft guns takes attacker and persecutor resp. airplane pilot and gun pointer as elements of one system. Airplane pilots and the gun pointers following their traces are reduced to the characteristics relevant for the antiaircraft system. This constitutes a level without differences between humans and machines. In 1956 Norbert Wiener sums up:
Therefore, in order to obtain as complete a mathematical treatment as possible of the over-all control problem, it is necessary to assimilate the different parts of the system to a single basis, either human or mechanical. Since our understanding of the mechanical elements of gun pointing appeared to us to be far ahead of our psychological understanding, we chose to try to find a mechanical analogue of the gun pointer and the airplane pilot. 10
During the course of the Second World War the prediction of the airplane pilot´s behavior became increasingly difficult because the airplanes became ever faster and more manoeuvrable. 11 In search for a solution of this problem a research group of the Bell Laboratories – with Shannon as one of the participants – developed the project "Nike-Ajax" as a system for constant corrections of the gun flight path. In 1953 the system was ready to use 12: The answer to an airplane pilot's flight path was the missile's automated recursion of the changing tracking data.
Since 1937 it was possible to track the target with radar: Thus the amount of incorrect data was reduced. In "Nike-Ajax" the tracking of the target via radar was integrated into the feedback system of a missile reacting in the course of its flight to new input data with changes in direction. 13
Cybernetic Models
The "material models" developed by cyberneticians for a wayfinding by machines (see below) turn the tracking of targets by anti-aircraft systems to civilian tasks.
In some research projects a rule defined as the hypothesis of a "theoretical model" and its proof by the processes in a "material model" supplement each other. 